# black_hole_orbits


This project was aimed at tracking the trajectory of particles or photons around a black hole through consideration of the Schwarzchild Metric in general relativity. As part of the project the trajectory of the particles or photons was tracked for a variety of initial conditions, such that critical values for angular momenta and impact parameters for particles crossing the event horizon of the black hole, or escaping its orbit could be determined.


In order to implement the RK4 method, the equation for the orbit of the particle had to be reconsidered as it was a second-order ordinary differential equation where the RK4 method relies on the ODE to be solved being of the first-order. However, this issue was resolved by parameterising the second-order equation so that it became a first order equation.


Problems 2 & 3:

The python script used throughout this project implemented the RK4 method of numerical integration by setting an initial value for the parameters and a value for the angular momentum l, and incrementing through a loop within which the values of q, r, phi, and tau were calculated, and placed into respective lists. At the end of each iteration of the loop, an if statement was used to determine whether the radial position of the particle had reached the Schwarzschild radius for the black hole or fallen below that value. In this event, the time taken for the radial plunge to occur was set as the value of a list and the loop was broken. Subsequently Matplotlib, specifically Pyplot, was used to produce a polar plot of the subsequent orbit of the particle based on the initial conditions and value for the angular momentum provided, where the initial radius and angular momentum were displayed in the legend of the plot as well as the plunge time, in the event of a radial plunge occurring.


Following this, the code entered another loop where the value for the angular momentum was incremented through a loop. Within this loop, the RK4 method was employed with the exception of the production of a polar plot. For each value for which a radial plunge orbit occurred, the value of the angular momentum was appended to a list and the proper time taken for the radial plunge to occur was appended to a separate list. As such, the first and final values in the angular momentum list provided the bounds of the angular momentum for which a radial plunge orbit, where the final value in the list was the critical angular momentum. The proper time for a radial plunge to occur was plotted as a function of angular momentum and the angular momentum for which a circular orbit will occur was calculated. The lists for the radial plunge angular momenta and their corresponding proper times for the plunge to occur were then saved to a CSV file.

Problem 4:

For the analysis of the orbits at increasingly smaller radii, the code followed the same procedure as in Problems 2 & 3 where the code incremented the value of the initial radius of the orbit. For each iteration of the initial radial position, the list of angular momentum values for which a radial plunge occurred were saved to CSV file, along with the list for the proper time taken for the radial plunge to occur. The final values in the radial plunge angular momentum lists were appended to a separate list for the critical angular momenta and the angular momenta values for a circular orbit were appended to a list for circular orbit angular momenta, for each initial radius value. The difference between the circular orbit angular momentum and the critical angular momentum, i.e. the perturbation required to cause a circularly orbiting particle to plunge to the centre, was also calculated by the code and appended to a list for the perturbation values, for each initial radius. The code then saved the initial radii, circular orbit angular momentum, critical angular momentum, and critical perturbation lists were saved to a CSV. The critical angular momenta and circular orbit angular momenta were then plotted as a function of initial radius, on the same plot, and the critical perturbation was plotted as a function of initial radius, on a separate plot.

Problem 5:

For the case of determining the particle orbits by numerically integrating the equations of motion to obtain r(t) and phi(t), the code followed the same method as in Problems 2 & 3, where the integration factor in this case was the co-ordinate time t rather than the phi co-ordinate. The proper time for the radial plunge was determined by applying the RK4 method to the equation for the rate of change of proper time with respect to the co-ordinate time. A polar plots for the particle orbit was then produced by the code, for the given initial radius and the angular momentum of the particle.

Problem 6:

In order to obtain the scattering cross-section of the black hole as a function of the particle speed, the code implemented the RK4 method to numerically integrate both the positive and negative instances of the rate of change of the r co-ordinate with respect to phi, while looping the values of the impact parameter, and the speed of the particle. The code applied the RK4 method to the negative equation initially, as the particle was infalling from a set initial value, calculating the resulting values of the r co-ordinate for each value of phi, while checking for each value of r whether the particle had fallen below the Schwarzschild radius or escaped to its initial position. If the position fell below the Schwarzschild radius, the loop was broken. If the particle reached its initial radial position, the value for b, v, and the scattering cross-section were appended to separate lists for the critical values. A second test was implemented, checking if an imaginary value was obtained for the r co-ordinate. If this was the case, the code entered another for loop, incrementing through the remaining iterations of the original loop but with the initial radial position being that of the iteration before the test condition was satisfied. In this new loop, the RK4 method was applied to the positive equation, with the same testing conditions for the radial position of the particle as before. The code incremented through a range of values for the impact parameter for each value for the particle speed. After completing the method for each value of v, the scattering cross-section of the black hole was plotted as a function of particle speed. The code also implemented a power law model fit applied to the results produced via the RK4 method, where the model was plotted alongside the results of the RK4 method, and the parameters of the fit were printed by the code.


Problem 7:

To determine the deflection angle of a photon as it was scattered by the black hole, the method outlined for analysing the particle scattering was applied, but for a fixed value of v=1 and with some minor changes to the test conditions for the radial position of the photons. The RK4 method was implemented exactly as before but for the condition in which the photon escaped back to a radial position exceeding the initial value, the deflection angle was calculated and the result appended to an list for the deflection angles and the value for the impact parameters appended to a separate list. After iterating through each value for the impact parameter, the deflection angles of the photon were plotted as a function of the impact parameter. The code implemented a hyperbolic fit which was applied to the results for the deflection angle produced by the RK4 method and plotted alongside the computed deflection angles. The parameters of the model fit were then printed by the code.

The code also produced polar plots of the photons motion as it was scattered by the black hole, in the instance in which a fixed value for the impact parameter was given. 
